---
layout: clrs-solution
title:  "Problem 2-4 Inversions"
---
>Let $$A[1..n]$$ be an array of $$n$$ distinct numbers. If $$i < j$$ and $$A[i] > A[j]$$, then the pair $$(i, j)$$ is called an ***inversion*** of $$A$$.

>***a.*** List the five inversions of the array $$\{2, 3, 8, 6, 1\}$$.

$$(1, 5), (2, 5), (3, 4), (3, 5), (4, 5)$$

>***b.*** What array with elements from the set $$\{1, 2,...,n\}$$ has the most inversions? How many does it have?

The array $$\{n, n-1,...,1\}$$ has $$\sum\limits_{i=1}^{n-1}n$$ inversions.

>***c.*** What is the relationship between the running time of insertion sort and the number of inversions in the input array? Justify your answer.

Considering INSERTION-SORT as presented on page 26, the actions within the **while** loop on lines 5-7 will be taken a number of times equal to the amount of inversions in the input array $$A$$. This means that the number of inversions is a constant factor of the running time of INSERITON-SORT.

>***d.*** Give an algorithm that determines the number of inversions in any permutation on $$n$$ elements in $$\Theta(n \lg n ) worst-case time. (*Hint*: Modify merge sort.)

Modify the MERGE procedure to count every time we select a value from the $$R$$ array. Every time this happens we increase the count by $$1 + i + j - 2$$ which counts the number of elements that are to the left in the array that is being worked with. There may potentially be additional elements to the left in other iterations of the array, but do not determine if they are smaller than the element in question at this point in time. Any remaining elements to the left are eventually considered during future swaps.

INVERSION-MERGE(A, p, q, r)

01 `n₁ = q - p + 1`

02 `n₂ = r - q`

03 `Let L[1 . . n₁] and R[1 . . n₂] be new arrays`

04 `for i = 1 to n₁`

05 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `L[i] = A[p + i - 1]`

06 `for j = 1 to n₂`

07 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `R[j] = A[q + j]`

08 `i = 1`

09 `j = 1`

10 `for k = p to r`

11 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `if j > n₂`

12 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = L[i]`

13 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `i = i + 1`

14 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `else if if i > n₁`

15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = R[j]`

16 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `inversions += 1 + i + j - 2`

17 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `j = j + 1`

18 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `else if L[i] ≤ R[j]`

19 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = L[i]`

20 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `i = i + 1`

21 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `else`

22 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = R[j]`

23 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `inversions += 1 + i + j - 2` 

24 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `j = j + 1`